Add blog post for Separate Image Filesystem for Kubelet (#43971)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-12-05-image-filesystem.md

Reviewer: Some style tips:

- Avoid using “we” unless you mean “the group of authors for this blog article”.
- Within the Markdown, use sentence case for headings
- It's even better if you wrap the Markdown at say 100 characters per line. We can do that as a follow up PR though.

Reviewer: > Within the Markdown, use sentence case for headings

Please do this.

> Avoid using “we” unless you mean “the group of authors for this blog article”.

Please do this too.

Author: addressed.

CRI-O, by default, writes its containers and images to `/var/lib/containers`, while containerd writes its containers and images to `/var/lib/containerd`.

In this blog post, we want to bring attention to ways that you can configure your container runtime to store its content separately from the default partition.  
This allows for more flexibility in configuring Kubernetes and provides support for adding a larger disk for the container storage while keeping the default filesystem untouched.  

One area we need to explain is where/what Kubernetes is writing to disk.

Kubernetes has persistent data and ephemeral data.  The root filesystem of Kubernetes is configurable, but it is usually assumed to be `/var/lib/kubelet`.  In the Kubernetes docs, this is sometimes referred to as the root or node filesystem.  The bulk of this data can be categorized into ephemeral storage, logs and container runtime.

**Ephemeral storage**

Pods and containers can require temporary or transient local storage for their operation. The lifetime of this ephemeral storage does not extend beyond the life of the individual pod, and this ephemeral storage cannot be shared across pods.

**Logs**

> Kubernetes stores the logs of each container running in `/var/logs`.  These logs are ephemeral and are monitored by Kubelet to make sure that they do not grow too large while the pods are running.

Reviewer: Is this right?
```suggestion
By default, Kubernetes stores the logs of each running container, as files within `/var/log`.  These logs are ephemeral and are monitored by the kubelet to make sure that they do not grow too large while the pods are running.
```

**Container runtime**

The container runtime has two different areas of storage for containers and images. Images are usually denoted as the read-only layer, as they are not modified when containers are running. There is a thin layer on top of containers that provides ephemeral storage for containers if the container is writing to the filesystem. This is referred to as the writable layer.

## Container Runtime Configurations

### CRI-O

CRI-O uses a storage configuration file to control how the container runtime stores persistent and temporary data.
CRI-O utilizes the [storage library](https://github.com/containers/storage).  
Some Linux distributions have a manual entry for storage (`man 5 containers-storage.conf`).
The main configuration for storage is located in `/etc/containers/storage.conf` and one can control the location for temporary data and the root directory.  
The root directory is where CRI-O stores the persistent data.

```toml
[storage]

> # Default Storage Driver

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Default storage driver
```

Author: done.

driver = "overlay"
# Temporary storage location
runroot = "/var/run/containers/storage"

> # Primary Read/Write location of container storage 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Primary read/write location of container storage 
```

Author: done.

graphroot = "/var/lib/containers/storage"
```

- graphroot
  - Persistent data stored from the container runtime
  - If SELinux is enabled, this must match the `/var/lib/containers/storage`
- runroot

>   - Temporary read/write access for container.
>   - Recommended to have this on a temporary filesystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Temporary read/write access for container
  - Recommended to have this on a temporary filesystem
```

Author: updated.

> - graphroot
>   - Persistent data stored from the container runtime
>   - If SELinux is enabled, this must match the `/var/lib/containers/storage`
> - runroot
>   - Temporary read/write access for container
>   - Recommended to have this on a temporary filesystem

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
- `graphroot`
  - Persistent data stored from the container runtime
  - If SELinux is enabled, this must match the `/var/lib/containers/storage`
- `runroot`
  - Temporary read/write access for container
  - Recommended to have this on a temporary filesystem
```
What do you mean by “must match”? Readers may not work it out.

A quick way to relabel your graphroot directory to match `/var/lib/containers/storage`.

```bash

> semanage fcontext -a -e /var/lib/containers/storage /YOUR_STORAGE_PATH
> restorecon -R -v /YOUR_STORAGE_PATH

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
semanage fcontext -a -e /var/lib/containers/storage <YOUR-STORAGE-PATH>
restorecon -R -v <YOUR-STORAGE-PATH>
```

```

> ### Containerd

Reviewer 2: Has been mentioned before. :smile:

> ### Containerd

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### containerd
```

containerd uses a toml configuration file to control where persistent and ephemeral data is stored.
The default path for the config file is located at `/etc/containerd/config.toml`.

> 

Author: @samuelkarp What is your suggestion for this? Is this for my information? Or do you want to add this to the containerd section? I'm happy to give you access to my PR if you want to add more details to the containerd section.

> 

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to add some suggestion to add `volatile` mount for overlayfs filesystem?
I think it's very useful feature because kubernetes doesn't allow to restart exited container.
For container's rootfs, we don't need sync-fs during umount rootfs. It can reduce IO impact for running containers or controller, like kubelet and containerd/cri-o.

> 

Author: I was not trying to be exhaustive with the container runtime setup for storage. I don't think that should be the goal of the post. I wanted to mention how containerd can have a separate container runtime filesystem from node filesystem.

> 

Reviewer 3: it's fine. The goal to separate image filesytem is to reduce IO impact, at least to me.

The relevant fields for containerd storage are `root` and `state`.

> - root
>   - The root directory for containerd metadata
>   - Default is `/var/lib/containerd`
>   - Root also requires selinux labels if your OS requires it
> - state
>   - Temporary data for containerd
>   - Default is `/run/containerd`

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
- `root`
  - The root directory for containerd metadata
  - Default is `/var/lib/containerd`
  - Root also requires SELinux labels if your OS requires it
- `state`
  - Temporary data for containerd
  - Default is `/run/containerd`
```

## Kubernetes Node Pressure Eviction

Kubernetes will automatically detect if the container filesystem is split from the node filesystem. When one separates the filesystem, Kubernetes is responsible for monitoring both the node filesystem and the container runtime filesystem.

> Kubernetes documentation refers to the node filesystem and the container runtime filesystem as nodefs and imagefs.

Reviewer: This is true; that _is_ what the docs say right now, but it misses out on relevant detail. What if `/var` is not the same filesystem as `/`? Or how about having a mount point for `/var/lib/kubelet`? Or `/var/lib/kubelet/pods/`?

If all of those mount points existed, could a reader work out which one represents the nodefs?
Alternatively, is having more than two block-backed filesystems (`/` and the imagefs) undefined behavior?

_Ideally_, this article covers enough of that to work. If you want to make a docs tweak in support of this, you can do that and then you can link to the revised page.

Reviewer: >We came to the conclusion that Kubelet will consider which disk `/var/lib/kubelet` is on to be the root filesystem.

OK, so: in this article, you should clarify that what Kubernetes calls the “root filesystem” is different from what the rest of the POSIX-speaking world uses the term to mean (ie: the filesystem that `/` is on).

We should also clarify that in the docs or possibly ask SIG Node to rethink the terminology, but that's something for a separate piece of work.

Author: Added a sentence about this. PTAL.

Reviewer: We can merge this, but I think it's just barely OK and will still confuse readers.
See https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43971/files#r1451741131 for a further suggestion.

Author: Added more clarification.

If either nodefs or the imagefs are running out of disk space, then the overall node is considered to have disk pressure.
Kubernetes will first reclaim space by deleting unusued containers and images, and then it will resort to evicting pods.
If one has a imagefs, then Kubernetes will garbage collect unused images on imagefs and will remove dead containers and pods from the nodefs.
If there is only a nodefs, then Kubernetes garbage collection includes dead containers, dead pods and unused images.

Kubernetes allows more configurations for determining if your disk is full.  
The eviction manager in Kubelet defines API fields to signal pressure.

> For filesystems, the relevant API are `nodefs.available`, `nodefs.inodesfree`, `imagefs.available`, and `imagefs.inodesfree`.

Reviewer: What do you think about:
```suggestion
For filesystems, the relevant measurements are `nodefs.available`, `nodefs.inodesfree`, `imagefs.available`, and `imagefs.inodesfree`.
```

> If there is no container runtime filesystem then imagefs is ignored.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
If there is no container image filesystem then `imagefs.*` is ignored.
```
?

Author: I think my suggestion is correct for the blog post. I want to call this the container runtime filesystem. In this blog I don't talk about separating the images and containers but I will be working on next so want to not call this image filesystem at the moment. Esp because both images/containers are stored on imagefs.

Reviewer: OK, then I recommend you clarify this a lot more. Readers may infer (like I did) that you meant “container image filesystem”.

I _think_ this stems from the kubelet being written to assume one block-backed filesystem for the node and no mount points other than system filesystems (`/proc`, `/sys` etc). However, that assumption has been gradually unpeeled since Kubernetes 1.0 without addressing the terminology and its implications. It has ended up hard to teach.

My advice: introduce the concepts (_container image filesystem_, _container runtime filesystem_, etc) explicitly before you reference them, and define them enough that it's clear.

Author: I think we should just reference container runtime filesystem as KEP-4191 is only alpha and I'd like to introduce that concept in a follow up post. 

I tried to add a sentence about the POSIX difference between root and k8s root.

Reviewer: I stand by the advice in https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43971#discussion_r1438880825

Author: I updated this to be a bit more clear.

Users can use the existing defaults:

> - memory.available<100Mi
> - nodefs.available<10%
> - imagefs.available<15%
> - nodefs.inodesFree<5% (Linux nodes)

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
- `memory.available` < 100MiB
- `nodefs.available` < 10%
- `imagefs.available` < 15%
- `nodefs.inodesFree` < 5% (Linux nodes)
```

Is there any default for `imagefs.inodesfree`?

Author: Nope. I have an issue posted about that.

EvictionHard defines limits, and once these limits are exceeded, pods will be evicted without any grace period.
EvictionSoft defines limits, and once these limits are exceeded, pods will be evicted with a grace period that can be set per signal.

If you specify an `EvictionHard`, it will replace the defaults.  This means it is important to set all signals in your configuration.

For example, the following Kubelet Configuration could be used to configure eviction signals and grace period options.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubelet.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: KubeletConfiguration
address: "192.168.0.8"
port: 20250
serializeImagePulls: false
evictionHard:
    memory.available:  "100Mi"
    nodefs.available:  "10%"
    nodefs.inodesFree: "5%"
    imagefs.available: "15%"
    imagefs.inodesFree: "5%"
evictionSoft:
    memory.available:  "100Mi"
    nodefs.available:  "10%"
    nodefs.inodesFree: "5%"
    imagefs.available: "15%"
    imagefs.inodesFree: "5%"
evictionSoftGracePeriod:
    memory.available:  "1m30s"
    nodefs.available:  "2m"
    nodefs.inodesFree: "2m"
    imagefs.available: "2m"
    imagefs.inodesFree: "2m"
evictionMaxPodGracePeriod: 60s
```

### Problems

> We recommend that you either use the default settings for eviction or you set all the fields for eviction.  

Reviewer: Assuming that you don't mean Red Hat is recommending:
```suggestion
The Kubernetes project recommends that you either use the default settings for eviction or you set all the fields for eviction.
```

---
layout: blog
title: 'Image Filesystem: Configuring Kubernetes to store containers on a separate filesystem'
date: 2023-12-05
slug: kubernetes-separate-imagefilesystem
---

**Authors:** Kevin Hannon (Red Hat)

A common issue in running/operating Kubernetes clusters is running out of disk space.

> When the node is provisioned, you should aim to have a good amount of storage space for the container runtime.  

Reviewer 2: The container runtime to me, and perhaps others, would be runc or containerd and such, whereas container images are a different thing. Unless we mean "the time when the container runs" as the "container runtime". We could clarify this to remove ambiguity such that there should be enough storage to store (or save) container images before a container can be run.

Author: CRI includes both a runtime service and an image service. CRI implementators will pull images also and they also run containers.

So I think my statement is correct.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When the node is provisioned, you should aim to have a good amount of storage space for your container images and running containers.
```

Author: updated.

> The container runtime usually writes to the `/var` partition.

Reviewer 2: The `/var` is a path that might be a separate mount point - often is not, and where running out of disk space can have more disastrous consequences.

Author: Good call out. Will rephrase.

Author: Updated. PTAL.

> CRI-O, by default, writes its containers and images to `/var/lib/containers`, while Containerd writes its containers and images to `/var/lib/containerd`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CRI-O, by default, writes its containers and images to `/var/lib/containers`, while containerd writes its containers and images to `/var/lib/containerd`.
```

Author: I think it should be capitalized because Containerd is a project name.

Author: I don't know english rules anymore apparently.  Not sure which is correct..

In this blog post, we want to bring attention to ways that you can configure your container runtime to store its content separately from the default partition.  

> This allows for more configurability to Kubernetes and provides support for adding a larger disk for the container storage while keeping the default filesystem untouched.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows for more flexibility in configuring Kubernetes and provides support for adding a larger disk for the container storage while keeping the default filesystem untouched.  
```

> One area we need to explain is where/what is Kubernetes writing to disk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One area we need to explain is where/what Kubernetes is writing to disk.
```

> Kubernetes has persistent data and ephemeral data.  The root filesystem of Kubernetes is configurable but it is usually assumed to be `/var/lib/kubelet`.  In the Kubernetes docs, this is sometimes referred to as the root filesystem or the node filesystem.  The bulk of this data can be categorized into ephemeral storage, logs and the container runtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes has persistent data and ephemeral data.  The root filesystem of Kubernetes is configurable, but it is usually assumed to be `/var/lib/kubelet`.  In the Kubernetes docs, this is sometimes referred to as the root or node filesystem.  The bulk of this data can be categorized into ephemeral storage, logs and container runtime.
```

**Ephemeral storage**

Pods and containers can require temporary or transient local storage for their operation. The lifetime of this ephemeral storage does not extend beyond the life of the individual pod, and this ephemeral storage cannot be shared across pods.

**Logs**

Kubernetes stores the logs of each container running in `/var/logs`.  These logs are ephemeral and are monitored by Kubelet to make sure that they do not grow too large while the pods are running.

**Container runtime**

> The container runtime has two different areas of storage for containers and images. Images are usually denoted as the read-only layer as they are not modified when containers are running. There is a thin layer on top of containers that provides ephemeral storage for containers if the container is writing to the filesystem. This is refered to as the writable layer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The container runtime has two different areas of storage for containers and images. Images are usually denoted as the read-only layer, as they are not modified when containers are running. There is a thin layer on top of containers that provides ephemeral storage for containers if the container is writing to the filesystem. This is referred to as the writable layer.
```

## Container Runtime Configurations

### CRI-O

> CRI-O uses a storage configuration file to control how the container runtime stores persistent data and temporary data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CRI-O uses a storage configuration file to control how the container runtime stores persistent and temporary data.
```

CRI-O utilizes the [storage library](https://github.com/containers/storage).  
Some Linux distributions have a manual entry for storage (`man 5 containers-storage.conf`).
The main configuration for storage is located in `/etc/containers/storage.conf` and one can control the location for temporary data and the root directory.  
The root directory is where CRI-O stores the persistent data.

```toml
[storage]

> 

Reviewer 2: :smile:

# Default Storage Driver
driver = "overlay"
# Temporary storage location
runroot = "/var/run/containers/storage"
# Primary Read/Write location of container storage 
graphroot = "/var/lib/containers/storage"
```

- Graphroot
  - Persistent data stored from the container runtime
  - If SELinux is enabled, this must match the `/var/lib/containers/storage`
- Runroot

>   - Temporary read/write access for container.

Reviewer 2: Drop or keep periods - to be consistent with the bulleted lists above.

Author: done.

  - Recommended to have this on a temporary filesystem.

A quick way to relabel your graphroot directory to match `/var/lib/containers/storage`.

```bash
semanage fcontext -a -e /var/lib/containers/storage /YOUR_STORAGE_PATH
restorecon -R -v /YOUR_STORAGE_PATH
```

### Containerd

> Containerd uses a .toml configuration file to control where persistent and ephemeral data is stored.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
containerd uses a .toml configuration file to control where persistent and ephemeral data is stored.
```

Reviewer 2: Not only for consistency, but also because it's styled with all lower-case in the official documentation.

The default path for the config file is located at `/etc/containerd/config.toml`.

The relevant fields for containerd storage are `root` and `state`.

- root
  - The root directory for containerd metadata
  - Default is `/var/lib/containerd`
  - Root also requires selinux labels if your OS requires it.
- state

>   - Temporary data for containerd.

Reviewer 2: Same as above - keep or drop period at the end.

Author: done.

  - Default is `/run/containerd`.

## Kubernetes Node Pressure Eviction

> Kubernetes will automatically detect the if the container filesystem is split from the node filesystem. When one separates the filesystem, Kubernetes is responsible for monitoring both the node filesystem and the container runtime filesystem.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Kubernetes will automatically detect if the container filesystem is split from the node filesystem. When one separates the filesystem, Kubernetes is responsible for monitoring both the node filesystem and the container runtime filesystem.
```

> Kubernetes documentaiton refers to the node filesystem and the container runtime filesystem as nodefs and imagefs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Kubernetes documentation refers to the node filesystem and the container runtime filesystem as nodefs and imagefs.
```

> If either nodefs or the imagefs are running out of disk space, then the overal node is considered to have disk pressure.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If either nodefs or the imagefs are running out of disk space, then the overall node is considered to have disk pressure.
```

Kubernetes will first reclaim space by deleting unusued containers and images and then it will resort to evicting pods.
If one has a imagefs, then Kubernetes will garbage collect unusued images on imagefs and will remove dead containers and pods from the nodefs.

> If there is only a nodefs, then Kubernetes garbage collections dead containers, dead pods and unusued images.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If there is only a nodefs, then Kubernetes garbage collections dead containers, dead pods and unused images.
```

> If there is only a nodefs, then Kubernetes garbage collections dead containers, dead pods and unusued images.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If there is only a nodefs, then Kubernetes garbage collection includes dead containers, dead pods and unused images.
```

Kubernetes allows more configurations for determining if your disk is full.  
The eviction manager in Kubelet defines API fields to signal pressure.
For filesystems, the relevant API are `nodefs.available`, `nodefs.inodesfree`, `imagefs.available`, and `imagefs.inodesfree`.
If there is no container runtime filesystem then imagefs is ignored.

Users can use the existing defaults:

- memory.available<100Mi
- nodefs.available<10%
- imagefs.available<15%
- nodefs.inodesFree<5% (Linux nodes)

Kubernetes allows one to set user defined values in `EvictionHard` and `EvictionSoft` in the Kubelet Configuration.  

> EvictionHard defines limits and once these limits are exceeded, pods will be evicted without any grace period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
EvictionHard defines limits, and once these limits are exceeded, pods will be evicted without any grace period.
```

> EvictionSoft defines limits and once these limits are exceeded, pods will be evicted with a grace period that can be set per signal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
EvictionSoft defines limits, and once these limits are exceeded, pods will be evicted with a grace period that can be set per signal.
```

> If you specify a `EvictionHard` it will replace the defaults.  This means it is important to set all signals in your configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you specify an `EvictionHard`, it will replace the defaults.  This means it is important to set all signals in your configuration.
```

For example, the following Kubelet Configuration could be used to configure eviction signals and grace period options.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubelet.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: KubeletConfiguration
address: "192.168.0.8"
port: 20250
serializeImagePulls: false
evictionHard:
    memory.available:  "100Mi"
    nodefs.available:  "10%"
    nodefs.inodesFree: "5%"
    imagefs.available: "15%"
    imagefs.inodesFree: "5%"
evictionSoft:
    memory.available:  "100Mi"
    nodefs.available:  "10%"
    nodefs.inodesFree: "5%"
    imagefs.available: "15%"
    imagefs.inodesFree: "5%"
evictionSoftGracePeriod:
    memory.available:  "1m30s"
    nodefs.available:  "2m"
    nodefs.inodesFree: "2m"
    imagefs.available: "2m"
    imagefs.inodesFree: "2m"
evictionMaxPodGracePeriod: 60s
```

### Problems

We recommend that you either use the default settings for eviction or you set all the fields for eviction.  
One can use the default settings or specify your own EvictionHard settings. If you miss a signal, then Kubernetes will not monitor that resource.

> One common misconfiguration administrators or users can hit is if they mount a new filesystem to `/var/lib/containers/storage` or `/var/lib/containerd`. Kubernetes will detect a separate filesystem so you want to make sure that `imagefs.inodesfree` and `imagefs.available` in this case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One common misconfiguration administrators or users can hit is if they mount a new filesystem to `/var/lib/containers/storage` or `/var/lib/containerd`. Kubernetes will detect a separate filesystem, so you want to make sure that `imagefs.inodesfree` and `imagefs.available` in this case.
```

> Another area of confusion is that ephemeral storage reporting does not change if one attaches a imagefs. Kubernetes will always report ephemeral storage capacity and allocations based on the nodefs. Pods that utilize the writeable layer with a imagefs will write to the imagefs and they can all write to the nodefs if the pod is writing to EmptyDir.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another area of confusion is that ephemeral storage reporting does not change if one attaches an imagefs. Kubernetes will always report ephemeral storage capacity and allocations based on the nodefs. Pods that utilize the writeable layer with a imagefs will write to the imagefs and they can all write to the nodefs if the pod is writing to EmptyDir.
```

### Future Work

> To fix the ephemeral storage reporting limitations and to provide more configurability to the container runtime, we are working on [KEP-4191](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/4191-split-image-filesystem/README.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To fix the ephemeral storage reporting limitations and to provide more configuration options to the container runtime, we are working on [KEP-4191](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/4191-split-image-filesystem/README.md).
```

> In this Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal (KEP), we will allow for Kubernetes to detect if the writeable layer is separated from the read-only layer (images). 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In this Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal (KEP), we will allow Kubernetes to detect if the writeable layer is separated from the read-only layer (images). 
```

This would allow us to have all ephemeral storage, including the writeable layer, on the same disk while also allowing for a separate disk for images.

We are also working on improving the test coverage around image filesystems.

### Getting Involved

> We always welcome new contributors so if you would like to get involved you can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We always welcome new contributors, so if you would like to get involved, you can
```

join our [Kubernetes Node Special-Interest-Group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-node) (SIG).

If you would like to share feedback, you can do so on our
[sig-node slack channel](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C0BP8PW9G).
If you're not already part of that Slack workspace, you can visit https://slack.k8s.io/ for an invitation.

> Special thanks to all the contributors that provided great reviews, shared valuable insight or suggested the topic idea.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Special thanks to all the contributors who provided great reviews, shared valuable insight or suggested the topic idea.
```

> Special thanks to all the contributors who provided great reviews, shared valuable insight or suggested the topic idea.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Special thanks to all the contributors who provided great reviews, shared valuable insights or suggested the topic idea.
```

This allows for more flexibility in configuring Kubernetes and provides support for adding a larger disk for the container storage while keeping the default filesystem untouched.  

One area we need to explain is where/what Kubernetes is writing to disk.

Kubernetes has persistent data and ephemeral data.  The root filesystem of Kubernetes is configurable, but it is usually assumed to be `/var/lib/kubelet`.
In the Kubernetes docs, this is sometimes referred to as the root or node filesystem.  The bulk of this data can be categorized into ephemeral storage, logs and container runtime.

**Ephemeral storage**

Pods and containers can require temporary or transient local storage for their operation.
The lifetime of this ephemeral storage does not extend beyond the life of the individual pod, and this ephemeral storage cannot be shared across pods.

**Logs**

By default, Kubernetes stores the logs of each running container, as files within `/var/log`.
These logs are ephemeral and are monitored by the kubelet to make sure that they do not grow too large while the pods are running.

> 

Author: I'm not sure if this is correct. If logs are shipped, I think they still may be monitored by kubelet and rotated. I'll check on that.

> 

Reviewer: What I wanted to explain was - as an aside - that you aren't forced to rely on the node-local storage which is time limited. You can have that node-local storage _and_ ship the logs somewhere durable.

> 

Author: I see. Yea that is a correct assessment.

**Container runtime**

The container runtime has two different areas of storage for containers and images. 
Images are usually denoted as the read-only layer, as they are not modified when containers are running.
The read-only layer can consist of multiple layers that are combined into a single read-only layer.
There is a thin layer on top of containers that provides ephemeral storage for containers if the container is writing to the filesystem. 

> This is referred to as the writable layer.

Author: updated but rephrased.

## Container Runtime Configurations

### CRI-O

> CRI-O uses a storage configuration file to control how the container runtime stores persistent and temporary data.

Author: done.

CRI-O utilizes the [storage library](https://github.com/containers/storage).  
Some Linux distributions have a manual entry for storage (`man 5 containers-storage.conf`).
The main configuration for storage is located in `/etc/containers/storage.conf` and one can control the location for temporary data and the root directory.  
The root directory is where CRI-O stores the persistent data.

```toml
[storage]
# Default storage driver
driver = "overlay"
# Temporary storage location
runroot = "/var/run/containers/storage"
# Primary read/write location of container storage 
graphroot = "/var/lib/containers/storage"
```

- `graphroot`
  - Persistent data stored from the container runtime
  - If SELinux is enabled, this must match the `/var/lib/containers/storage`
- `runroot`
  - Temporary read/write access for container
  - Recommended to have this on a temporary filesystem

A quick way to relabel your graphroot directory to match `/var/lib/containers/storage`.

```bash
semanage fcontext -a -e /var/lib/containers/storage <YOUR-STORAGE-PATH>
restorecon -R -v <YOUR-STORAGE-PATH>
```

### containerd

> containerd uses a toml configuration file to control where persistent and ephemeral data is stored.

Author: done.

The default path for the config file is located at `/etc/containerd/config.toml`.

The relevant fields for containerd storage are `root` and `state`.

- `root`
  - The root directory for containerd metadata
  - Default is `/var/lib/containerd`
  - Root also requires SELinux labels if your OS requires it
- `state`
  - Temporary data for containerd
  - Default is `/run/containerd`

## Kubernetes Node Pressure Eviction

Kubernetes will automatically detect if the container filesystem is split from the node filesystem. 
When one separates the filesystem, Kubernetes is responsible for monitoring both the node filesystem and the container runtime filesystem.
Kubernetes documentation refers to the node filesystem and the container runtime filesystem as nodefs and imagefs.
If either nodefs or the imagefs are running out of disk space, then the overall node is considered to have disk pressure.
Kubernetes will first reclaim space by deleting unusued containers and images, and then it will resort to evicting pods.

> If one has a imagefs, then Kubernetes will garbage collect unused images on imagefs and will remove dead containers and pods from the nodefs.

Author: done.

If there is only a nodefs, then Kubernetes garbage collection includes dead containers, dead pods and unused images.

Kubernetes allows more configurations for determining if your disk is full.  

> The eviction manager in Kubelet defines API fields to signal pressure.

Author: done.

For filesystems, the relevant measurements are `nodefs.available`, `nodefs.inodesfree`, `imagefs.available`, and `imagefs.inodesfree`.
If there is no container runtime filesystem then imagefs is ignored.

Users can use the existing defaults:

- `memory.available` < 100MiB
- `nodefs.available` < 10%
- `imagefs.available` < 15%
- `nodefs.inodesFree` < 5% (Linux nodes)

> Kubernetes allows one to set user defined values in `EvictionHard` and `EvictionSoft` in the Kubelet Configuration.  

Author: done.

`EvictionHard`
: defines limits; once these limits are exceeded, pods will be evicted without any grace period.

`EvictionSoft`
: defines limits; once these limits are exceeded, pods will be evicted with a grace period that can be set per signal.

> If you specify an `EvictionHard`, it will replace the defaults.  This means it is important to set all signals in your configuration.

Author: done.

For example, the following kubelet configuration could be used to configure eviction signals and grace period options.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubelet.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: KubeletConfiguration
address: "192.168.0.8"
port: 20250
serializeImagePulls: false
evictionHard:
    memory.available:  "100Mi"
    nodefs.available:  "10%"
    nodefs.inodesFree: "5%"
    imagefs.available: "15%"
    imagefs.inodesFree: "5%"
evictionSoft:
    memory.available:  "100Mi"
    nodefs.available:  "10%"
    nodefs.inodesFree: "5%"
    imagefs.available: "15%"
    imagefs.inodesFree: "5%"
evictionSoftGracePeriod:
    memory.available:  "1m30s"
    nodefs.available:  "2m"
    nodefs.inodesFree: "2m"
    imagefs.available: "2m"
    imagefs.inodesFree: "2m"
evictionMaxPodGracePeriod: 60s
```

### Problems

The Kubernetes project recommends that you either use the default settings for eviction or you set all the fields for eviction.
One can use the default settings or specify your own EvictionHard settings. If you miss a signal, then Kubernetes will not monitor that resource.

> One common misconfiguration administrators or users can hit is if they mount a new filesystem to `/var/lib/containers/storage` or `/var/lib/containerd`. Kubernetes will detect a separate filesystem, so you want to make sure that `imagefs.inodesfree` and `imagefs.available` in this case.

Author: done.

> Another area of confusion is that ephemeral storage reporting does not change if one attaches an imagefs. Kubernetes will always report ephemeral storage capacity and allocations based on the nodefs. Pods that utilize the writeable layer with a imagefs will write to the imagefs and they can all write to the nodefs if the pod is writing to EmptyDir.

Author: updated.
